E.  Declaration on International 
Cooperation in the Exploration and 
Use of Outer Space for the Benefit 
and in the Interest of All States, 
Taking into Particular Account the 
Needs of Developing Countries14

 The General Assembly,

 Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer 
Space on the work of its thirty-ninth session15 and the text of the  Declaration on Inter-
national Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for the Benefit and 
in the Interest of All States, Taking into Particular Account the Needs of Developing 
Countries, as approved by the Committee and annexed to its report,16

 Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,

 Recalling notably the provisions of the Treaty on the Principles Governing the 
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon 
and Other Celestial Bodies,1

 Recalling also its relevant resolutions relating to activities in outer space,

 Bearing in mind the recommendations of the Second United Nations  Conference 
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,17 and of other international 
conferences relevant in this field,

14Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 51/122 of 13 December 1996.
15Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/51/20).
16Ibid., annex IV.
17See Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 

9-21 August 1982 and corrigenda (A/CONF.101/10 and Corr.1 and 2).



63

 Recognizing the growing scope and significance of international cooperation 
among States and between States and international organizations in the exploration 
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

 Considering experiences gained in international cooperative ventures,

 Convinced of the necessity and the significance of further strengthening inter-
national cooperation in order to reach a broad and efficient collaboration in this field 
for the mutual benefit and in the interest of all parties involved,

 Desirous of facilitating the application of the principle that the exploration and use 
of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for 
the benefit and in the interest of all countries, irrespective of their degree of economic 
or scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind,

 Adopts the Declaration on International Cooperation in the Exploration and Use 
of Outer Space for the Benefit and in the Interest of All States, Taking into Particular 
Account the Needs of Developing Countries, set forth in the annex to the present 
resolution.

Annex.  Declaration on International Cooperation in 
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for 
the Benefit and in the Interest of all States, 
Taking into Particular Account the Needs of 
Developing Countries

1. International cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful 
purposes (hereafter “international cooperation”) shall be conducted in accordance 
with the provisions of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations 
and the Treaty on the Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration 
and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. It shall be 
carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all States, irrespective of their degree of 
economic, social or scientific and technological development, and shall be the province 
of all mankind. Particular account should be taken of the needs of developing countries.

2. States are free to determine all aspects of their participation in international 
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space on an equitable and mutu-
ally acceptable basis. Contractual terms in such cooperative ventures should be fair  
and reasonable and they should be in full compliance with the legitimate rights and 
interests of the parties concerned as, for example, with intellectual property rights.



64

3. All States, particularly those with relevant space capabilities and with programmes 
for the exploration and use of outer space, should contribute to promoting and  
fostering international cooperation on an equitable and mutually acceptable basis. In 
this context, particular attention should be given to the benefit for and the interests 
of developing countries and countries with incipient space programmes stemming  
from such international cooperation conducted with countries with more advanced 
space capabilities.

4. International cooperation should be conducted in the modes that are  considered 
most effective and appropriate by the countries concerned, including, inter alia,  
governmental and non-governmental; commercial and non- commercial; global, multi-
lateral, regional or bilateral; and international cooperation among countries in all 
levels of development.

5. International cooperation, while taking into particular account the needs of  
developing countries, should aim, inter alia, at the following goals, considering their 
need for technical assistance and rational and efficient allocation of financial and 
technical resources:

 (a) Promoting the development of space science and technology and of its 
applications; 

 (b) Fostering the development of relevant and appropriate space capabilities 
in interested States;

 (c) Facilitating the exchange of expertise and technology among States on a 
mutually acceptable basis.

6. National and international agencies, research institutions, organizations for 
development aid, and developed and developing countries alike should consider the 
appropriate use of space applications and the potential of international cooperation 
for reaching their development goals.

7. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should be strengthened in 
its role, among others, as a forum for the exchange of information on national and 
international activities in the field of international cooperation in the exploration and 
use of outer space.

8. All States should be encouraged to contribute to the United Nations  Programme 
on Space Applications and to other initiatives in the field of international cooperation 
in accordance with their space capabilities and their  participation in the exploration 
and use of outer space.



Part three
