D.  Principles Relevant to the Use  
of Nuclear Power Sources in  
Outer Space11

 The General Assembly,

 Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer 
Space on the work of its thirty-fifth session12 and the text of the Principles Relevant 
to the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space as approved by the Committee 
and annexed to its report,13

 Recognizing that for some missions in outer space nuclear power sources are 
particularly suited or even essential owing to their compactness, long life and other 
attributes,

 Recognizing also that the use of nuclear power sources in outer space should focus 
on those applications which take advantage of the particular properties of nuclear 
power sources,

 Recognizing further that the use of nuclear power sources in outer space should 
be based on a thorough safety assessment, including probabilistic risk analysis, with 
particular emphasis on reducing the risk of accidental exposure of the public to harm-
ful radiation or radioactive material,

 Recognizing the need, in this respect, for a set of principles containing goals and 
guidelines to ensure the safe use of nuclear power sources in outer space,

 Affirming that this set of Principles applies to nuclear power sources in outer space 
devoted to the generation of electric power on board space objects for nonpropulsive 
purposes, which have characteristics generally comparable to those of systems used 
and missions performed at the time of the adoption of the Principles,

11Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/68 of 14 December 1992.
12Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/47/20).
13Ibid., annex.



55

 Recognizing that this set of Principles will require future revision in view of emerg-
ing nuclear power applications and of evolving international recommendations on 
radiological protection,

 Adopts the Principles Relevant to the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer 
Space as set forth below.

Principle 1. Applicability of international law
Activities involving the use of nuclear power sources in outer space shall be carried 
out in accordance with international law, including in particular the Charter of the 
United Nations and the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the 
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies.1

Principle 2. Use of terms
1. For the purpose of these Principles, the terms “launching State” and “State launch-
ing” mean the State which exercises jurisdiction and control over a space object with 
nuclear power sources on board at a given point in time relevant to the principle 
concerned.

2. For the purpose of principle 9, the definition of the term “launching State” as 
contained in that principle is applicable.

3. For the purposes of principle 3, the terms “foreseeable” and “all possible” describe 
a class of events or circumstances whose overall probability of occurrence is such that 
it is considered to encompass only credible possibilities for purposes of safety analy-
sis. The term “general concept of defence-in-depth” when applied to nuclear power 
sources in outer space refers to the use of design features and mission operations in 
place of or in addition to active systems, to prevent or mitigate the con sequences of 
system malfunctions. Redundant safety systems are not necessarily required for each 
individual component to achieve this purpose. Given the special requirements of space 
use and of varied missions, no particular set of systems or features can be specified as 
essential to achieve this objective. For the purposes of paragraph 2 (d) of principle 3, 
the term “made critical” does not include actions such as zero-power testing which 
are fundamental to ensuring system safety.



56

Principle 3. Guidelines and criteria for safe use 
In order to minimize the quantity of radioactive material in space and the risks involved, 
the use of nuclear power sources in outer space shall be restricted to those space mis-
sions which cannot be operated by non-nuclear energy sources in a reasonable way.

1. General goals for radiation protection and nuclear safety

 (a) States launching space objects with nuclear power sources on board shall 
endeavour to protect individuals, populations and the biosphere against radiological 
hazards. The design and use of space objects with nuclear power sources on board shall 
ensure, with a high degree of confidence, that the  hazards, in foreseeable operational 
or accidental circumstances, are kept below acceptable levels as defined in paragraphs 
1 (b) and (c).

Such design and use shall also ensure with high reliability that radioactive material 
does not cause a significant contamination of outer space;

 (b) During the normal operation of space objects with nuclear power sources 
on board, including re-entry from the sufficiently high orbit as defined in paragraph 
2 (b), the appropriate radiation protection objective for the public recommended by 
the International Commission on Radiological Protection shall be observed. During 
such normal operation there shall be no significant radiation exposure;

 (c) To limit exposure in accidents, the design and construction of the nuclear 
power source systems shall take into account relevant and generally accepted inter-
national radiological protection guidelines.

Except in cases of low-probability accidents with potentially serious radiological con-
sequences, the design for the nuclear power source systems shall, with a high degree 
of confidence, restrict radiation exposure to a limited geographical region and to indi-
viduals to the principal limit of 1 mSv in a year. It is permissible to use a subsidiary 
dose limit of 5 mSv in a year for some years, provided that the average annual effective 
dose equivalent over a lifetime does not exceed the principal limit of 1 mSv in a year.

The probability of accidents with potentially serious radiological consequences 
referred to above shall be kept extremely small by virtue of the design of the system.

Future modifications of the guidelines referred to in this paragraph shall be applied 
as soon as practicable;

 (d) Systems important for safety shall be designed, constructed and operated 
in accordance with the general concept of defence-in-depth. Pursuant to this concept, 
foreseeable safety-related failures or malfunctions must be capable of being corrected 
or counteracted by an action or a procedure, possibly automatic.



57

The reliability of systems important for safety shall be ensured, inter alia, by redun-
dancy, physical separation, functional isolation and adequate independence of their 
components.

Other measures shall also be taken to raise the level of safety.

2. Nuclear reactors

 (a) Nuclear reactors may be operated:

 (i) On interplanetary missions;
 (ii) In sufficiently high orbits as defined in paragraph 2 (b);
 (iii) In low-Earth orbits if they are stored in sufficiently high orbits after 

the operational part of their mission.

 (b) The sufficiently high orbit is one in which the orbital lifetime is long enough 
to allow for a sufficient decay of the fission products to approximately the activity of the 
actinides. The sufficiently high orbit must be such that the risks to existing and future 
outer space missions and of collision with other space objects are kept to a minimum. 
The necessity for the parts of a destroyed reactor also to attain the required decay time 
before re-entering the Earth’s atmosphere shall be considered in determining the suf-
ficiently high orbit altitude;

 (c) Nuclear reactors shall use only highly enriched uranium 235 as fuel. The 
design shall take into account the radioactive decay of the fission and activation 
products;

 (d) Nuclear reactors shall not be made critical before they have reached their 
operating orbit or interplanetary trajectory;

 (e) The design and construction of the nuclear reactor shall ensure that it cannot 
become critical before reaching the operating orbit during all possible events, including 
rocket explosion, re-entry, impact on ground or water, submersion in water or water 
intruding into the core;

 ( f) In order to reduce significantly the possibility of failures in satellites with 
nuclear reactors on board during operations in an orbit with a lifetime less than in 
the sufficiently high orbit (including operations for transfer into the sufficiently high 
orbit), there shall be a highly reliable operational system to ensure an effective and 
controlled disposal of the reactor.



58

3. Radioisotope generators

 (a) Radioisotope generators may be used for interplanetary missions and other 
missions leaving the gravity field of the Earth. They may also be used in Earth orbit 
if, after conclusion of the operational part of their mission, they are stored in a high 
orbit. In any case ultimate disposal is necessary;

 (b) Radioisotope generators shall be protected by a containment system that is 
designed and constructed to withstand the heat and aerodynamic forces of re-entry in 
the upper atmosphere under foreseeable orbital conditions, including highly elliptical 
or hyperbolic orbits where relevant. Upon impact, the containment system and the 
physical form of the isotope shall ensure that no radioactive material is scattered into 
the environment so that the impact area can be completely cleared of radioactivity by 
a recovery operation.

Principle 4. Safety assessment
1. A launching State as defined in principle 2, paragraph 1, at the time of launch shall, 
prior to the launch, through cooperative arrangements, where relevant, with those 
which have designed, constructed or manufactured the nuclear power sources, or 
will operate the space object, or from whose territory or facility such an object will be 
launched, ensure that a thorough and comprehensive safety assessment is conducted. 
This assessment shall cover as well all relevant phases of the mission and shall deal 
with all systems involved, including the means of launching, the space platform, the 
nuclear power source and its equipment and the means of control and communication 
between ground and space.

2. This assessment shall respect the guidelines and criteria for safe use  contained in 
principle 3.

3. Pursuant to article XI of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States 
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial 
Bodies, the results of this safety assessment, together with, to the extent feasible, an 
indication of the approximate intended time-frame of the launch, shall be made publicly 
available prior to each launch, and the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall 
be informed on how States may obtain such results of the safety assessment as soon as 
possible prior to each launch.

Principle 5. Notification of re-entry
1. Any State launching a space object with nuclear power sources on board shall in a 
timely fashion inform States concerned in the event this space object is malfunctioning 



59

with a risk of re-entry of radioactive materials to the Earth. The information shall be 
in accordance with the following format:

 (a) System parameters:

 (i) Name of launching State or States, including the address of the 
authority which may be contacted for additional information or 
assistance in case of accident;

 (ii) International designation;
 (iii) Date and territory or location of launch;
 (iv) Information required for best prediction of orbit lifetime, trajectory 

and impact region;
 (v) General function of spacecraft;

 (b) Information on the radiological risk of nuclear power source(s):

 (i) Type of nuclear power source: radioisotopic/reactor;
 (ii) The probable physical form, amount and general radiological charac-

teristics of the fuel and contaminated and/or activated components 
likely to reach the ground. The term “fuel” refers to the nuclear mate-
rial used as the source of heat or power.

This information shall also be transmitted to the Secretary-General of the  
United Nations.

2. The information, in accordance with the format above, shall be provided by the 
launching State as soon as the malfunction has become known. It shall be updated 
as frequently as practicable and the frequency of dissemination of the updated infor-
mation shall increase as the anticipated time of re-entry into the dense layers of the 
Earth’s atmosphere approaches so that the international community will be informed 
of the situation and will have sufficient time to plan for any national response activities 
deemed necessary.

3. The updated information shall also be transmitted to the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations with the same frequency.

Principle 6. Consultations
States providing information in accordance with principle 5 shall, as far as reasonably 
practicable, respond promptly to requests for further information or consultations 
sought by other States.



60

Principle 7. Assistance to States
1. Upon the notification of an expected re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere of a 
space object containing a nuclear power source on board and its components, all 
States possessing space monitoring and tracking facilities, in the spirit of international 
cooperation, shall communicate the relevant information that they may have avail-
able on the malfunctioning space object with a nuclear power source on board to 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the State concerned as promptly 
as possible to allow States that might be affected to assess the situation and take any 
precautionary measures deemed necessary.

2. After re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere of a space object containing a nuclear 
power source on board and its components:

 (a) The launching State shall promptly offer and, if requested by the affected 
State, provide promptly the necessary assistance to eliminate actual and possible harm-
ful effects, including assistance to identify the location of the area of impact of the 
nuclear power source on the Earth’s surface, to detect the re-entered material and to 
carry out retrieval or clean-up operations;

 (b) All States, other than the launching State, with relevant technical capabili-
ties and international organizations with such technical capabilities shall, to the extent 
possible, provide necessary assistance upon request by an affected State.

In providing the assistance in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, the 
special needs of developing countries shall be taken into account.

Principle 8. Responsibility
In accordance with article VI of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities 
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other 
Celestial Bodies, States shall bear international responsibility for national activities 
involving the use of nuclear power sources in outer space, whether such activities are 
carried on by governmental agencies or by non-governmental entities, and for assur-
ing that such national activities are carried out in conformity with that Treaty and the 
recommendations contained in these Principles. When activities in outer space involv-
ing the use of nuclear power sources are carried on by an international organization, 
responsibility for compliance with the aforesaid Treaty and the recommendations 
contained in these Principles shall be borne both by the international organization 
and by the States participating in it.



61

Principle 9.  Liability and compensation
1. In accordance with article VII of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities 
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other 
Celestial Bodies, and the provisions of the Convention on International Liability for 
Damage Caused by Space Objects,3 each State which launches or procures the launch-
ing of a space object and each State from whose territory or facility a space object is 
launched shall be internationally liable for damage caused by such space objects or 
their component parts. This fully applies to the case of such a space object carrying a 
nuclear power source on board. Whenever two or more States jointly launch such a 
space object, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any damage caused, in accord-
ance with article V of the above-mentioned Convention.

2. The compensation that such States shall be liable to pay under the aforesaid  
Convention for damage shall be determined in accordance with international law and 
the principles of justice and equity, in order to provide such reparation in respect of the 
damage as will restore the person, natural or juridical, State or international organiza-
tion on whose behalf a claim is presented to the  condition which would have existed 
if the damage had not occurred.

3. For the purposes of this principle, compensation shall include reimbursement of 
the duly substantiated expenses for search, recovery and clean-up  operations, including 
expenses for assistance received from third parties.

Principle 10. Settlement of disputes
Any dispute resulting from the application of these Principles shall be resolved through 
negotiations or other established procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes, 
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Principle 11. Review and revision
These Principles shall be reopened for revision by the Committee on the Peaceful 
Uses of Outer Space no later than two years after their adoption.



62
